---
title: "Arrow Electronics Signs Distribution Agreement with Sigasi"
layout: page 
pager: true
author: Philippe Faes
date: 2013-08-13
tags: 
  - press release
---
<div class="content">
<h2>Press release fror immediate release</h2>	<p><strong>Englewood, Colo. ; San Jose, Cali. &#8211; August 13, 2013</strong> &#8211; Arrow Electronics, Inc. (<span class="caps">NYSE</span>: <span class="caps">ARW</span>) has signed a distribution agreement with Sigasi, a <span class="caps">VHDL</span> (<span class="caps">VHSIC</span> hardware description language) integrated development environment (<span class="caps">IDE</span>) provider. Under the agreement, Arrow will distribute Sigasi&#8217;s hardware design entry tool &#8220;Sigasi Pro&#8221; to customers in North America.</p>	<p>&#8220;Arrow is a key player in offering <span class="caps">FPGA</span>-based components and solutions,&#8221; says Philippe Faes, chief executive officer for Sigasi. &#8220;We know that their field application engineers are highly skilled in <span class="caps">FPGA</span> technology, which is important to our mutual customers. Together with the Arrow sales force and <span class="caps">FAE</span>s, will be able to serve our mutual customers even better.&#8221;</p>	<p>&#8220;Sigasi expands Arrow&#8217;s diverse software solutions offering,&#8221; said David West, vice president of supplier marketing for Arrow Electronics. &#8220;The relationship with Sigasi helps Arrow offer our customers a full range of solutions for every stage of our customers&#8217; product lifecycle.&#8221;</p>	<h3>About Arrow Electronics</h3>	<p>Arrow Electronics (www.arrow.com) is a global provider of products, services and solutions to industrial and commercial users of electronic components and enterprise computing solutions. Arrow serves as a supply channel partner for more than 100,000 original equipment manufacturers, contract manufacturers and commercial customers through a global network of more than 470 locations in 55 countries.</p>	<h3>About Sigasi</h3>	<p>Sigasi is a privately held, Angel backed <span class="caps">EDA</span> company, founded in 2008. Sigasi makes <span class="caps">RTL</span> design easier, more efficient and fun. Sigasi has customers worldwide in industries ranging from military and aerospace, over automotive to consumer electronics and telecom.</p>	<h3>Media Contact</h3>	<p>Media Contacts:</p>	<p>Chris Maio<br/>Manager, Global Communications<br/>Arrow Electronics, Inc.<br/>631-847-5454<br/><a href="mailto:cmaio@arrow.com" class="elf-mailto elf-icon">cmaio@arrow.com</a></p>	<p>Philippe Faes<br/>Chief Executive Officer<br/>Sigasi nv<br/>408-627-7691<br/><a href="mailto:philippe.faes@sigasi.com" class="elf-mailto elf-icon">philippe.faes@sigasi.com</a></p>  </div>

