---
title: "Sigasi 2.0 Professional: ready for industrial size projects"
layout: page 
pager: true
author: Mark Christiaens
date: 2011-10-13
tags: 
  - hdt-2.0
---
<div class="content">
<p>As you may have noticed, we just let <a href="http://www.sigasi.com/download">Sigasi 2.0 Professional</a> loose on the world.  Feature wise, the professional version is close to the previously released <a href="http://www.sigasi.com/sigasi-starter-edition">Sigasi 2.0 Starter Edition</a>.   The main external difference between the Professional and the Starter Edition is the fact that the starter edition only <a href="http://www.sigasi.com/sigasi-starter-edition">supports the full feature set up to a maximum project size</a> .  After that, it falls back to basic Emacs-like functionality.</p>	<p>With so little external difference, what exactly did we do this summer to make our professional customers happy?  Barring some bug-fixing, most of our time was spent improving the performance.  Some highlights:	</p><ul><li>Figuring out what declaration an identifier corresponds to (<b>scoping</b>) was massively improved by optimizing the internal code and also (and this is a big win) by loading more accurately only those <span class="caps">VHDL</span> files that could contain the correct declaration.</li>		<li><b>Building</b> the complete project in the background now exploits machines with multiple cores by farming out the build work onto multiple threads.  If you have an octo-core, you'll enjoy this one.</li>		<li><b>Memory consumption</b> was optimized: if you give Sigasi Professional more memory, it will go through a project faster by using this memory to cache more resources but it will adapt gracefully to situations with lower memory.</li>		<li><b>Library mapping</b> (assigning a resource to a <span class="caps">VHDL</span> library) is now smarter in that it does not always need to rebuild an entire project when a <span class="caps">VHDL</span> file is assigned to a different library.</li>		<li><b>Fast access to a <span class="caps">VHDL</span> file</b> thanks to a resource cache.  The resource cache is responsible for storing the parse and build results of your projects in an optimized form on disk and reproducing them 5 to 10 times faster.</li>		<li><b>Template auto-completions are much faster</b> thanks to lazy evaluation.  The hard work to generate the complete text of some complex templates is postponed until you actually select that specific template instance.</li>		<li><b>Error detection is ergonomically tuned</b>.  Previously, all error detection occurred during typing.  Now the error detection is split into 3 phases.  The cheap checks are performed while you type.  The slower ones are performed when you save and the really expensive checks are performed through explicit request (right click on an editor and select validate).</li>	</ul><p>All these changes should result in a vastly improved user experience &#8230; and there is more to come &#8230;</p>	<p>Hope you enjoy!</p>  </div>

