---
title: "Sigasi goes Freemium"
layout: page 
pager: true
author: Philippe Faes
date: 2011-06-29
---
<div class="content">
<p><em>Editorial Contact:</em><br/>Philippe Faes, <span class="caps">CEO</span> Sigasi<br/>T: +32 9 265 71 38 philippe.faes@sigasi.com</p>	<h2><span class="caps">EDA</span> startup goes head-on with popular open source editors.</h2>	<p><strong>San Jose, CA / Ghent, Belgium &#8211; June 29, 2011</strong> <em>Sigasi announces a free Starters Edition of their popular Sigasi <span class="caps">HDT</span> design entry and code comprehension tool. This announcement was made after Sigasi&#8217;s series of blog posts that contrast the technical merits of the <span class="caps">IDE</span>s against the free Emacs <span class="caps">VHDL</span> editor.</em></p>	<p>Engineers have always been very emotional about their favorite text editors. But as technology advances, new and better tools emerge. That is the reason why Sigasi <span class="caps">CEO</span> Philippe Faes posted a number of articles comparing Emacs to Sigasi. &#8220;It was my intention to make a relevant, technical comparison,&#8221; says Faes. There have been heated discussions for years, about which editor is better than the other. &#8220;It was an interesting exercise to join these discussions while staying clear of the traditional emotional arguments,&#8221; explains Faes. </p>	<p>The core technology of any intelligent design environment (<span class="caps">IDE</span>) is its built-in parser. Using this parser, the tool will know what the code means and it will be able to help the developer. By contrast, traditional code editors do not have such parsers. When people try to add intelligence to such editors, they have to rely on pattern matching with regular expression. &#8220;The old regular expressions technology just fails to enable important new features like code navigation, refactoring and semantic highlighting,&#8221; says Faes. &#8220;Those feature could save you a ton of time, and reduce errors in the long run.&#8221;</p>	<p>Sigasi has built the second generation of its <span class="caps">IDE</span> tool for the <span class="caps">VHDL</span> language, which has been in public beta for three months. Today, they announce that the Sigasi 2.0 Starters Edition will be permanently available free of charge. The starters edition was designed to replace traditional text editors like Vi and Emacs. &#8220;For small projects, the Pro features will also be available for free,&#8221; says Hendrik Eeckhaut.</p>	<p>Engineers willing to try the Sigasi 2.0 Starter Edition are welcome to visit <a href="http://www.sigasi.com">www.sigasi.com</a> and download the software free of charge.</p>  </div>


