---
title: "Engineers are smart enough to change editors"
layout: page 
pager: true
author: philippe.faes (Sigasi)
date: 2011-06-07
tags: 
  - Emacs
---
<div class="content">
<h2>Too stupid or too stubborn?</h2>	<p>A few weeks ago, one of my colleagues at Sigasi (a VI user himself) stated that anybody who is not using Emacs for their <span class="caps">VHDL</span> work will either be <em>too stubborn or too stupid</em> to switch to Sigasi. (Note: this was a personal opinion and <strong>not</strong> the official company position). He had been using VI (<a href="http://www.vim.org" class="elf-external elf-icon">gvim</a> actually) for all of his <span class="caps">VHDL</span> work years ago. As he learned more out about the great features of the Emacs <span class="caps">VHDL</span> mode, he concluded that he himself had probably been too stubborn to switch. Other text editors (VI, Notepad++, UltraEdit, Crimson) may be highly configurable and versatile, but they are not highly adapted to <span class="caps">VHDL</span> (or to any other language, for that matter).</p>	<p>The problem with the whole <a href="http://xkcd.com/378/" class="elf-external elf-icon">editor wars thing</a> is that no editor is really better than the next for simple tasks like editing bash scripts or <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/INI_file" class="elf-external elf-icon"><span class="caps">INI</span></a> files. Even <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Notepad_(software)" class="elf-external elf-icon">MS Notepad</a> or <a href="http://www.nano-editor.org/" class="elf-external elf-icon">nano</a> will do fine. For a task that takes only three minutes, there is little to gain from a better editor. But if you are engineering a complex system, you need good tools. </p>	<p>I agree that (before Sigasi existed) anything else then Emacs for VHDL was probably not the best choice. I don't agree with the "too stupid or too stubborn" part. Many people roll in to a particular editor and get to know all nice features over the years. There is a relatively <em>large cost to switching</em> because you have to use a new tool. Learning a new editor is not so much an intellectual challenge as it a new habit. Most Emacs users couldn't tell you the keyboard shortcut for "fix sensitivity list" even if their lives depended on it. Their <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muscle_memory" class="elf-external elf-icon">fingers know the shortcuts</a>. Learning a new tool and new shortcuts takes practice. It requires the insight that another tool is really better and the discipline to go through with the transition.</p>	<p>I think that people working with inferior editors are neither stupid nor stubborn. I think they just never got the right trigger to decide on switching to a better editor. I also believe that engineers are smart enough to consider <strong>relevant</strong> and <strong>technical</strong> arguments and to weigh these arguments against the effort of switching (and against their pride).</p>	<p>In my series of <a href="/content/why-emacs-so-great-and-why-we-want-beat-it">Sigasi vs. Emacs comparisons</a> I would like to leave it up to you for this week. Not because I don't have any time to write a new post, but because I want to know what <em>you</em> think. </p>	<ul><li>Why do you use Emacs for <span class="caps">VHDL</span> (or for any other language) and why is it so great?</li>		<li>Why do you love Notepad++, UltraEdit or JEdit?</li>		<li>Why do you use an <span class="caps">IDE</span> and why does that beat the King of traditional Unix editors?</li>		<li>What are your criteria for selecting your code entry / code comprehension tools?</li>	</ul><p>Let me know in the comments section, below.</p>  <div id="book-navigation-1518" class="book-navigation">            <div class="page-links clear-block">              <a href="/content/emacs-vs-sigasi-matrix" class="page-previous" title="Go to previous page">&#8249; Emacs vs Sigasi matrix</a>                    <a href="/better-emacs-vhdl-mode" class="page-up" title="Go to parent page">up</a>                    <a href="/content/emacs-syntax-errors" class="page-next" title="Go to next page">Emacs Syntax errors &#8250;</a>          </div>      </div>  </div>

