---
title: "Five reasons why we built EDA tools on Eclipse"
layout: page 
pager: true
author: philippe.faes (Sigasi)
date: 2011-12-13
tags: 
  - eclipse
---
<div class="content">
<p>Somebody asked me why we had build our Sigasi <span class="caps">VHDL</span> plugin on top of Eclipse. There are several reasons. Here are five of them.</p>	<h2>1. Familiar environment for software developers</h2>	<p>If you have been developing some serious software, you're probably used to the look and feel of an Integrated Development Environment (<span class="caps">IDE</span>). Even the embedded software market is shifting towards Eclipse. Both <a href="http://www.altera.com/devices/processor/nios2/tools/ni2-development_tools.html" class="elf-external elf-icon">Altera</a> and <a href="http://www.xilinx.com/tools/platform.htm" class="elf-external elf-icon">Xilinx</a> have an embedded software kit based on Eclipse.</p>	<h2>2. Translation for the basic infrastructure is provided</h2>	<p>Hardly any <span class="caps">EDA</span> software comes in languages other than English. <a href="/content/installing-translations-eclipse">Sigasi doesn't either.</a> But when you are using Sigasi, most of the text on your screen is provided by Eclipse, not by Sigasi. As a result, you can have 95% of the tool translated, just like that. And maybe we'll provide Japanese translations some day.</p>	<h2>3. Revision systems provided</h2>	<p>All popular version control systems have an Eclipse plugin. This means that our customers can use their favorite <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Source_Code_Management" class="elf-external elf-icon"><span class="caps">SCM</span></a> with Sigasi, without any additional engineering effort on our part. We prefer building new stuff. Not rehashing yet another <span class="caps">GUI</span> interface for <a href="http://subversion.tigris.org/" class="elf-external elf-icon">Subversion</a>.</p>	<h2>4. Update mechanism</h2>	<p>Keeping software up to date can be a real pain. Eclipse makes this <a href="/update_howto">pretty easy</a>. </p>	<h2>5. Feature rich editor</h2>	<p>Can we have <a href="/content/sigasi-keyboard-shortcuts-cheat-sheet">key combination</a> for duplicating a line of code? And for moving a line of code up or down? How about <a href="http://help.eclipse.org/indigo/index.jsp?topic=%2Forg.eclipse.jdt.doc.user%2Freference%2Fviews%2Fshared%2Fref-findreplace.htm" class="elf-external elf-icon">search and replace</a>, based on regular expressions? And <a href="/screencast/block-select">block select</a>? Did I mention we want <a href="/documentation/2.1.1/sigasi.html#Linenumbers">line numbers</a> and <a href="/screencast/diff">side-by-side file compare</a>? And does the editor support <a href="/faq/does-sigasi-support-multi-byte-characters">multi-byte characters</a>?</p>	<p>Yes. You can have all of that and much more. </p>	<p>Imagine how much engineering effort it would have taken to build all of these features from scratch. Because we have built our tool on the solid Eclipse foundation, we can offer our customers more value for money. </p>  </div>

