---
title: "Deprecated IEEE Libraries"
layout: page 
pager: true
author: heeckhau (Sigasi)
date: 2012-05-15
tags: 
  - linting
  - VHDL IEEE
  - VHDL packages
---
<div class="content">
<h2>What are deprecated <span class="caps">IEEE</span> libraries?</h2>	<p>Don't use <code>ieee.std_logic_unsigned</code> and similar libraries because they are not standardized. <br/>Instead, <strong>use ieee.numeric_std.all</strong>.</p>	<p><em>Note</em>: if you want to disable warnings for this in the Sigasi tool, select <strong>Window &gt; Preferences &gt; Sigasi&gt; VHDL &gt; Errors/Warnings</strong> and at the bottom of that page, set the severity of  "Deprecated IEEE packages" to <strong>ignore</strong>.</p>	<h2>Why is that?</h2>	<p><em>This article was originally published at <a href="http://tams-www.informatik.uni-hamburg.de/vhdl/doc/faq/FAQ1.html#4.11" class="elf-external elf-icon">http://tams-www.informatik.uni-hamburg.de/vhdl/doc/faq/FAQ1.html#4.11</a>.<br/></em></p>	<p>The <span class="caps">IEEE</span> did not, originally, define a standard set of types and overloaded functions to handle vectors which contained coded numeric values. This meant that individual vendors were free to define their own types and functions.<br/>Synopsys produced three packages &#8211; std_logic_arith, std_logic_signed, and std_logic_unsigned. std_logic_signed/std_logic_unsigned operated on type std_logic_vector, and gave an implicit meaning to the contents of the vector. std_logic_arith, however, defined two new types, <span class="caps">SIGNED</span> and <span class="caps">UNSIGNED</span>, and operated on these types only. Unfortunately, Synopsys decided that these packages should be compiled into library <span class="caps">IEEE</span>. Other vendors, including Cadence and Mentor, now produced their own versions of std_logic_arith, which were not the same as Synopsys's. They also required their packages to be placed in library <span class="caps">IEEE</span>.</p>	<p>Finally, the <span class="caps">IEEE</span> decided to standardize this situation, and produced packages numeric_bit and numeric_std (see Section 4.8 on how to obtain numeric_bit and numeric_std). numeric_bit is based on type bit, numeric_std on on type std_logic. Both packages followed Synopsys in defining new types, <span class="caps">SIGNED</span> and <span class="caps">UNSIGNED</span>. However, the package functions did not have the same names, or parameters, as the Synopsys functions.</p>	<p>Currently many vendors support numeric_bit/numeric_std. Hence, for maximum portability, avoid using a package called std_logic_signed or std_logic_unsigned, and always use <span class="caps">SIGNED</span> or <span class="caps">UNSIGNED</span> types (or integers) for arithmetic. If you are using Synopsys, use std_logic_arith, and if you are not using Synopsys, use numeric_std (if it is supported). This is not completely portable, since the functions are still different (for example, TO_UNSIGNED vs. <span class="caps">CONV</span>_UNSIGNED), but it is a lot better than using different types in different environments.</p>	<p>Partially extracted from an article by Evan Shattock.</p>  <div id="book-navigation-1518" class="book-navigation">            <div class="page-links clear-block">              <a href="/content/clock-edge-detection" class="page-previous" title="Go to previous page">&#8249; Clock edge detection</a>                    <a href="/content/coding-conventions" class="page-up" title="Go to parent page">up</a>                    <a href="/content/static-checks-vhdl-code" class="page-next" title="Go to next page">Static Checks for VHDL Code &#8250;</a>          </div>      </div>  </div>

