---
title: "Eclipse Workbench Tutorial"
layout: page 
pager: true
author: heeckhau (Sigasi)
date: 2012-03-13
---
<div class="content">
<p>Eclipse is used for a lot more than just hardware design. E.g. Java and C developers use the Eclipse workbench too. Most Sigasi tutorials and documentation focus on the hardware specific parts that Sigasi adds to Eclipse. This tutorial however, focuses on the basics of Eclipse: <strong>The Eclipse workbench</strong>.<br/>This tutorial contains 6 lessons (about <strong>15 minutes each</strong>) that get you started with the <strong>basic Eclipse functionality</strong>. You will learn how to <strong>organize</strong>, <strong>customize</strong> and <strong>use</strong> Eclipse and learn some useful <strong>keyboard shortcuts</strong> and <strong>other tips and tricks</strong>.</p>	<p>This tutorial is suited for both people who are new to Eclipse and for people who want to learn more. <strong>No prior experience with Eclipse is required</strong>. The tutorial uses Java as an example, but involves no programming. It is designed to be relevant for any language that is build on top of the Eclipse Workbench.  The lessons guide you through each topic step-by-step, explaining each step as we go. The tutorial is based on Eclipse 3.3 (Europa) while Sigasi is based on Eclipse 3.7. So while some details might have slightly changed, the idea&#8217;s remain relevant.</p>	<p>Tutorials were written and recorded by Mark Dexter. They were <a href="http://eclipsetutorial.sourceforge.net/" class="elf-external elf-icon">originally shared on Sourceforge</a> and mirrored on this site for your convencience.</p>	<h2>Video controls : Subtitles and Table of Contents.</h2>	<p>You can enable closed captions (subtitles) by clicking the <strong>CC</strong> button in the video controls. You can also fast forward or rewind by clicking titles in the table of contents.</p>  <div id="book-navigation-1486" class="book-navigation">    <ul class="menu"><li class="leaf first"><a href="/content/lesson-1-files">Lesson 1 : Files</a></li><li class="leaf"><a href="/content/lesson-2-views">Lesson 2 : Views</a></li><li class="leaf"><a href="/content/lesson-3-perspectives">Lesson 3 : Perspectives</a></li><li class="leaf"><a href="/content/lesson-4-help-navigation">Lesson 4 : Help &amp; Navigation</a></li><li class="leaf"><a href="/content/lesson-5-keyboard-shortcuts">Lesson 5 : Keyboard Shortcuts</a></li><li class="leaf last"><a href="/content/lesson-6-prefs-local-history">Lesson 6 : Prefs &amp; Local History</a></li></ul>        <div class="page-links clear-block">                          <a href="/content/lesson-1-files" class="page-next" title="Go to next page">Lesson 1 : Files &#8250;</a>          </div>      </div>  </div>


