---
title: "No organization"
layout: page 
pager: true
author: philippe.faes (Sigasi)
date: 2011-12-03
tags: 
  - best practices
  - hdt-2.0
  - howto
---
<div class="content">
<p>The Sigasi development environment allows a very large flexibility on how to organize <span class="caps">VHDL</span> projects. So much in fact, that it can become confusing. Let me outline three <em>recommended ways</em> of organizing your <span class="caps">VHDL</span> project. </p>	<ol><li>No organization (described in this article)</li>		<li><a href="/content/organizing-vhdl-project-one-design-one-folder">One design in one folder</a></li>		<li><a href="/content/organizing-vhdl-project-one-ip-block-project">Aggregation of reusable projects</a></li>	</ol><p>(One <a href="http://www.sigasi.com/content/organizing-legacy-projects">not-so-recommended way described here</a> is useful if you are working with legacy projects whose files are scattered over many folders).</p>	<p>In this post, I'll start with the simplest way of organizing: not organizing at all. In technical terms, we call this <em>editing external <span class="caps">VHDL</span> files</em>, because the files are outside of any projects.</p>	<h2>Setting it up</h2>	<p>There is no set up required. You just open the <span class="caps">VHDL</span> file you want to edit. Either click <strong>File &gt; Open File&#8230;</strong> or drag a <span class="caps">VHDL</span> file from your file browser to the edit area. Here is a short <a href="/screencast/edit-vhdl-without-project">screencast on how to work with external <span class="caps">VHDL</span> files</a>.</p>	<h2>Pros and Cons</h2>	<p>The good part of "no organization" is that you don't have to organize. There is no set up time and you can get started viewing and editing a <span class="caps">VHDL</span> file in a matter of seconds. On the down side, several interesting features won't work:</p>	<ul><li>No errors when you use an undeclared name.</li>		<li>Any name you use that is declared in another <span class="caps">VHDL</span> file will be treated as just that: a name. This means the following features cannot work for these names:	<ul><li>rename refactoring</li>		<li>semantic coloring</li>		<li>jump to declaration</li>		<li>hover</li>	</ul></li>	</ul><h2>When to use</h2>	<p>If you open several <span class="caps">VHDL</span> files using this external files method, Sigasi will try to link them together. So some features might work, depending on how which <span class="caps">VHDL</span> files you have opened.</p>	<p>We suggest you use the single <span class="caps">VHDL</span> file mode for quickly looking at a file and for making small changes. If you are going to work seriously on your project, we suggest you use one of the two other methods.</p>  <div id="book-navigation-1518" class="book-navigation">            <div class="page-links clear-block">              <a href="/content/setting-project" class="page-previous" title="Go to previous page">&#8249; Setting up a Project</a>                    <a href="/content/setting-project" class="page-up" title="Go to parent page">up</a>                    <a href="/content/one-design-one-folder" class="page-next" title="Go to next page">One design in one folder &#8250;</a>          </div>      </div>  </div>

