---
title: "Why you need good documentation for your VHDL and Verilog code"
layout: page 
pager: true
author: Smrita
date: 2013-11-10
tags: 
  - Guest Blog
  - documentation
comments: true
bannerad: true
---


<em>In this blog series, guest blogger Smrita talks about the need for
[documentation for complex RTL designs](http://www.sigasi.com/sigasi-doc). </em>

In engineering, [technical documentation](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technical_documentation)
refers to any type of documentation that describes handling,
functionality and architecture of a technical product or a product under
development or use. The intended recipient for product technical
documentation is both the (proficient) end user as well as the
administrator, service or maintenance technician. In contrast to a mere
"cookbook" manual, technical documentation aims at providing enough
information for a user to understand inner and outer dependencies of the
product at hand. The technical documentation is intended to help the
maintainers of the system (the people who need to keep the system
running smoothly, fix problems, etc.) The maintainers are usually
technical people, who need to know [exactly how the system
works](http://www.igcseict.info/theory/8/docs/index.html).

In other words, Technical documentation is quite simply the compilation
of documents which aim to [describe a technical
product](http://www.tetras.sk/en/stranka/what-is-technical-documentation).
Technical documentation is characterised by its systematic and
structured framework.

Introduction
------------

Code documentation is an important aspect of both software and hardware
projects and all general principles of software engineering can be
applied to text-based (or: RTL-based) hardware design in such languages
as VHDL, Verilog and SystemVerilog.
Scott Ambler describes a software document as “any artifact external to
source code whose purpose is to convey information in a persistent
manner”. When engineering software or hardware, the code alone is insufficient.
There must be text along with it to describe various aspects of its
intended operation.
It is important for the code documents to be thorough, but not so
verbose that it becomes difficult to maintain them. Several How-to and
overview documentation are found specific to the software application or
software product being documented by API Writers. This documentation may
be used by developers, testers and also the end customers or clients
using this software application. Today, we see lot of high end
applications in the field of power, energy, transportation, networks,
aerospace, safety, security, industry automation and a variety of other
domains. Technical documentation has become important within such
organizations as the basic and advanced level of information may change
over a period of time with architecture changes. Hence, technical
documentation has gained lot of importance in recent times, [especially
in the software
field](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_documentation#Technical_documentation).

Benefits of documentation for software and hardware code
--------------------------------------------------------

By definition a *complex* hardware design is [difficult to
understand](http://davidlongstreet.wordpress.com/2009/09/09/benefits-to-documentation-yes-there-are-some/)
and needs to be documented well.
The purpose of technical RTL documentation is to help the intended
audience understand the product and accomplish various tasks. For
example, the purpose of a document can be to help the audience install
the product, use the product, or administer the product.
The main focus lies in the step-by-step process to deliver the
technically complex information in a clear, concise, simple, consistent
and usable manner. This helps [inform the target audience about the
technology](http://www.hcltech.com/blogs/engineering-and-rd-services/technical-documentation-benefits-and-significance)
in the most appropriate format.

We have [all been frustrated at times](http://www.hcltech.com/blogs/engineering-and-rd-services/technical-documentation-benefits-and-significance)
when we are not able to understand the features of a product, or when
the user interface layout is not explained well enough. One problem with
unorganized information is it can’t be found, so there is a lot wasted
time spent pecking around looking for the right document or trying to
find the right person to talk to. Another problem is if your
documentation can’t be found, then redundant functionality is often
created, that result in waste of time.

The real benefit to the organization of documentation is reducing wasted
time and spending more productive time on projects. This, of course,
improves profitability.

Another benefit to organized documents is the ability to [reuse parts of the application documentation](http://davidlongstreet.wordpress.com/2009/09/09/benefits-to-documentation-yes-there-are-some/).

Other benefits of documentation for RTL hardware designs can be listed
as follows:

-   **Doesn't change over time:** This is one of the primary drives for
    creating documentation.
-   **Person independent:** You do not need to have access to a
    particular person with the right knowledge to retrieve the
    documentation; you can just look it up.
-   **Scalable:** In a pure person-to-person approach to information
    sharing, you'll quickly find a small subset of project members using
    a great deal of their time explaining project aspects to other
    project members. This can be alleviated somewhat by first attempting
    to looking information up in the project documentation, before
    turning to the project oracle in the particular area of interest.
-   **Geographical invariant:** If a project team or stakeholders aren't
    all placed at the same location, the barrier to person-to-person
    information exchange rises significantly, thereby making
    documentation based information exchange more attractive. This is of
    course only the case if the documentation is accessible at all
    relevant sites, eg. properly Internet based, or at least
    intranet based.
-   **24/7 accessibility:** Documentation based information can be
    access all the time. So even when project members have different
    working hours, vacations etc. they will still (in principle) have
    access to information generated during their absence.
-   **Reference information:** Where person-to-person information
    exchange usually varies according to the context it is used in,
    documentation based information never changes unless somebody
    actively updates the documentation. This makes documentation a more
    stable reference platform, than person based information, which has
    a tendency to vary more depending on who is delivering the
    information when. The [variations in the information consumers
    interpretation](http://mikisseth.blogspot.in/2009/06/cost-and-benefits-of-documentation.html)
    of the information provided is of course another matter.

Technical documentation is beneficial for the organization too. It
creates a good impression on new customers because this is the
customer’s first touch point after the sale. It helps the customer make
decisions related to the purchase of the full product or its features,
and informs the customer about the instructions and troubleshooting tips
that are essential for ensuring a great customer experience, which can
reduce customer support costs. Also, technical documentation provides
good product knowledge to the customer that increases chances of finding
greater functionality in the product, and enables customers to avoid
errors, thanks to accurate and [clearly-written
procedures](http://www.hcltech.com/blogs/engineering-and-rd-services/technical-documentation-benefits-and-significance).

Hence, good technical documentation is very essential. It can provide a
better understanding of the product and prevent customer errors, making
business processes more reliable.

Coming up
---------

Next week we'll discuss: [/tech/how-much-time-spent-writing-documentation-versus-developing-rtl-code]
